content/docs/how-to-guides/how-to-use-kubectl-with-omni/index.md, before:

---
title: "Use Kubectl With Omni"
date: 2022-11-17T10:14:18-08:00
draft: false
weight: 90
---

This guide shows you how to use `kubectl` with an Omni-managed cluster.

Navigate to the clusters page by clicking on the "Clusters" button in the sidebar.

{{< imgproc 1.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

Click the three dots in the cluster's item to access the options menu.

{{< imgproc 2.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

Click "Download kubeconfig".

{{< imgproc 3.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

Alternatively you can click on the cluster and download the `kubeconfig` from the cluster dashboard.

{{< imgproc 4.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

Install the `oidc-login` plugin per the official documentation: https://github.com/int128/kubelogin.

## OIDC authentication over SSH
If you need to use `kubectl`, `talosctl`, or `omnictl` on a remote host over SSH you may need a way to forward your local client traffic to the remote host where `kubectl-oidc_login` is installed.

To do that you can tunnel the ports over SSH when you connect to the host.
This command will open a tunnel using the default ports `oidc-login` attempts to use.

```
ssh -L 8000:localhost:8000 -L 18000:localhost:18000 $HOST
```
You can run this in a separate terminal temporarily while you authenticate your CLI tools.

If you want to have the port forwarding happen automatically every time you connect to the host you should update your ~/.ssh/config file to contain the following lines for the host.

```
Host myhost
  LocalForward 8000 127.0.0.1:8000
  LocalForward 18000 127.0.0.1:18000
```
You will also need to disable automatic browser opening because it will likely try to open a browser on the SSH host or fail to open if one is not installed.
Do that by adding `--skip-open-browser` in your $KUBECONFIG file.

```
      args:
        - oidc-login
        - get-token
        - --oidc-issuer-url=https://$YOUR_ENDPOINT.omni.siderolabs.io/oidc
        - --oidc-client-id=native
        - --oidc-extra-scope=cluster:not-eks
        - --skip-open-browser
      command: kubectl
      env: null
```

Commit message:

docs: multiple updates
* update priority
* reorg how-tos
* added _index to self_hosted
* consolidated patch how-tos
* added note about Secureboot requiring > 1.7

Signed-off-by: Steve Francis <steve.francis@talos-systems.com>

content/docs/how-to-guides/how-to-use-kubectl-with-omni/index.md, after:

---
title: "Use Kubectl With Omni"
date: 2022-11-17T10:14:18-08:00
draft: false
weight: 90
---

With an Omni managed cluster, you use `kubectl` as with any other Kubernetes cluster, with the caveat that you must use the `kubeconfig` file that you download from Omni, and have the OIDC plug-in installed for your `kubectl`.

All Kubernetes `kubectl` commands are routed through the API endpoint created by Omni, and Omni validates access through the configured OIDC provider or other user authorization mechanism.
This ensures your Kubernetes cluster is safe - unlike other systems, mere possession of a `kubeconfig` grants no access - the user also has be valid in the configured authentication system of Omni.

### Download the KubeConfig file
Navigate to the clusters page by clicking on the "Clusters" button in the sidebar.

Click on the cluster and download the `kubeconfig` from the cluster dashboard.
The downloaded file will reflect the name of the cluster.

{{< imgproc 4.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

### Install the OIDC plug in
Install the `oidc-login` plugin per the official documentation: https://github.com/int128/kubelogin#getting-started

### Access the cluster with kubectl
```
kubectl --kubeconfig ./talos-default-kubeconfig.yaml get nodes
```
Be sure you use the name of the downloaded kubeconfig file, which will vary with the name of the cluster.

The first time you use the `kubectl` command to query a cluster, a browser window will open requiring you to authenticate with your identity provider.

 > If you get a message `error: unknown command "oidc-login" for "kubectl" Unable to connect to the server` then you need to install the oidc-login plugin as noted above, and ensure it is in your $PATH.


## OIDC authentication over SSH
If you need to use `kubectl`, `talosctl`, or `omnictl` on a remote host over SSH you may need a way to forward your local client traffic to the remote host where `kubectl-oidc_login` is installed.

To do that you can tunnel the ports over SSH when you connect to the host.
This command will open a tunnel using the default ports `oidc-login` attempts to use.

```
ssh -L 8000:localhost:8000 -L 18000:localhost:18000 $HOST
```
You can run this in a separate terminal temporarily while you authenticate your CLI tools.

If you want to have the port forwarding happen automatically every time you connect to the host you should update your ~/.ssh/config file to contain the following lines for the host.

```
Host myhost
  LocalForward 8000 127.0.0.1:8000
  LocalForward 18000 127.0.0.1:18000
```
You will also need to disable automatic browser opening because it will likely try to open a browser on the SSH host or fail to open if one is not installed.
Do that by adding `--skip-open-browser` in your $KUBECONFIG file.

```
      args:
        - oidc-login
        - get-token
        - --oidc-issuer-url=https://$YOUR_ENDPOINT.omni.siderolabs.io/oidc
        - --oidc-client-id=native
        - --oidc-extra-scope=cluster:not-eks
        - --skip-open-browser
      command: kubectl
      env: null
```
