content/docs/how-to-guides/how-to-expose-http-service-from-a-cluster/index.md, before:

---
title: "How to Expose an HTTP Service from a Cluster"
description: "A guide on how to expose am HTTP service from a cluster for external access."
date: 2023-08-10T00:00:00Z
draft: false
weight: 40
---

This guide shows you how to expose an HTTP Kubernetes Service to be accessible from Omni Web.

## Enabling Workload Service Proxying Feature

You first need to enable the workload service proxying feature on the cluster you want to expose Services from.

If you are creating a new cluster, you can enable the feature by checking the checkbox in the "Cluster Features" section:

{{< imgproc 1.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

If you have an existing cluster, simply check the checkbox in the features section of the cluster overview page:

{{< imgproc 2.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

You will notice that the "Exposed Services" section will appear on the left menu for the cluster the feature is enabled on.

## Exposing a Kubernetes Service

Let's install a simple Nginx deployment and service to expose it.

Create the following `nginx.yaml` file:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: workload-proxy-example-nginx
  namespace: default
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: workload-proxy-example-nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: workload-proxy-example-nginx
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: workload-proxy-example-nginx
          image: nginx:stable-alpine-slim
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: workload-proxy-example-nginx
  namespace: default
  annotations:
    omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/port: "50080"
    omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/label: Sample Nginx
    omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/icon: 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
spec:
  selector:
    app: workload-proxy-example-nginx
  ports:
    - name: http
      port: 80
      targetPort: 80
```

Apply it to the cluster:
```bash
kubectl apply -f nginx.yaml
```

Note the following annotations on the cluster:
```yaml
omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/port: "50080"
omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/label: Sample Nginx
omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/icon: 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
```

To expose a service, **only the `omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/port` annotation is required**.

Its value **must be a port that is unused** on the nodes, such as by other exposed Services.

The annotation `omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/label` can be set to a human-friendly name to be displayed on the Omni Web left menu.

If not set, the default name of `<service-name>.<service-namespace>` will be used.

The annotation `omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/icon` can be set to render an icon for this service on the Omni Web left menu.

If set, valid values are:
- Either a base64-encoded SVG
- Or a base64-encoded GZIP of an SVG

To encode an SVG file `icon.svg` to be used for the annotation, you can use the following command:
```bash
gzip -c icon.svg | base64
```

## Accessing the Exposed Service

You will notice that the Service you annotated will appear under the "Exposed Services" section in Omni Web,
on the left menu when the cluster is selected.

Clicking it will render the Service in Omni.

{{< imgproc 3.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}
This feature only works with HTTP services.
**Raw TCP or UDP are not supported**.

The services are only accessible to the users who are **authenticated to Omni
and have at least `Reader` level access** to the cluster containing the Service.
{{% /alert %}}

Commit message:

docs: update cluster templates references
Update the cluster template reference docs to include:
- `updateStrategy` and `deleteStrategy` reference
- `features` section

Also mention the cluster templates option in the "How to Expose an HTTP Service from a Cluster" document.

Signed-off-by: Utku Ozdemir <utku.ozdemir@siderolabs.com>

content/docs/how-to-guides/how-to-expose-http-service-from-a-cluster/index.md, after:

---
title: "How to Expose an HTTP Service from a Cluster"
description: "A guide on how to expose am HTTP service from a cluster for external access."
date: 2023-08-10T00:00:00Z
draft: false
weight: 40
---

This guide shows you how to expose an HTTP Kubernetes Service to be accessible from Omni Web.

## Enabling Workload Service Proxying Feature

You first need to enable the workload service proxying feature on the cluster you want to expose Services from.

If you are creating a new cluster, you can enable the feature by checking the checkbox in the "Cluster Features" section:

{{< imgproc 1.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

If you have an existing cluster, simply check the checkbox in the features section of the cluster overview page:

{{< imgproc 2.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

If you are using cluster templates, you can enable the feature by adding the following to the cluster template YAML:
```yaml
features:
  enableWorkloadProxy: true
```

You will notice that the "Exposed Services" section will appear on the left menu for the cluster the feature is enabled on.

## Exposing a Kubernetes Service

Let's install a simple Nginx deployment and service to expose it.

Create the following `nginx.yaml` file:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: workload-proxy-example-nginx
  namespace: default
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: workload-proxy-example-nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: workload-proxy-example-nginx
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: workload-proxy-example-nginx
          image: nginx:stable-alpine-slim
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: workload-proxy-example-nginx
  namespace: default
  annotations:
    omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/port: "50080"
    omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/label: Sample Nginx
    omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/icon: H4sICB0B1mQAA25naW54LXN2Z3JlcG8tY29tLnN2ZwBdU8ly2zAMvfcrWPZKwiTANWM5015yyiHdDr1kNLZsa0axvKix8/cFJbvNdCRCEvEAPDxQ8/vLSydem+Op7XeVtGCkaHbLftXuNpX8Pax1kveL+UetxY9919erZiWG/k58+/kgvjb7Xonz+Qyn182RP2DZvyjx0OyaYz30x38o8dhemqP43vfdSWi9+DDnCHFuV8O2ksmY/UWKbdNutsPfz9e2OX/pL5U0wghCvqVgqrtTJbfDsL+bzUrhM0F/3MzQGDPjlHIxH9qhaxbrtmueh7d987zbtLvLfDZtz/f1sBWrSj5aD9klhVswwdfWgLNJXR+GL6sgRwSP6QmRd53yELzCCMmRShCjqyFmLOsWwCiIKS01GJOUA0qZHQUby5ZXlsAGjkv8wmuK00A+gDfxoD1DSREQOm0teBdVgOA4wqdY1i0i+AiG4lOGbFEhg7icZWJIgCMz+It1DA/hYDQXScxVjyyohpCprBt7SswylJze49htVNxQjk6xDuSXTAs12OQgUGLWMRenLj4pTsNb11SSde/uPhmbA2U5e6c3qxBiEdhTOhhO77CIwxvJ55p7NVlN1owX+xkOJhUb3M1OTuShAZpQIoK72mtcSF5bwExLoxECjsqzssgIzdMLB2IdiPViApHbsTwhH1KNkIgFHO2tTOB54pjfXu3k4QLechmK9lCGzfm9s0XbQtmWfqa4NB0Oo1lzVtUsx6wjKxtYBcKSMkJOyGzJBbYxBM0aBypZfdBRJyDCz0zNRjXZKw0D/J75KFApFvPVTt73kv/6b0Lr9bqMp/wziz8W9M/pAwQAAA==
spec:
  selector:
    app: workload-proxy-example-nginx
  ports:
    - name: http
      port: 80
      targetPort: 80
```

Apply it to the cluster:
```bash
kubectl apply -f nginx.yaml
```

Note the following annotations on the cluster:
```yaml
omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/port: "50080"
omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/label: Sample Nginx
omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/icon: 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
```

To expose a service, **only the `omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/port` annotation is required**.

Its value **must be a port that is unused** on the nodes, such as by other exposed Services.

The annotation `omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/label` can be set to a human-friendly name to be displayed on the Omni Web left menu.

If not set, the default name of `<service-name>.<service-namespace>` will be used.

The annotation `omni-kube-service-exposer.sidero.dev/icon` can be set to render an icon for this service on the Omni Web left menu.

If set, valid values are:
- Either a base64-encoded SVG
- Or a base64-encoded GZIP of an SVG

To encode an SVG file `icon.svg` to be used for the annotation, you can use the following command:
```bash
gzip -c icon.svg | base64
```

## Accessing the Exposed Service

You will notice that the Service you annotated will appear under the "Exposed Services" section in Omni Web,
on the left menu when the cluster is selected.

Clicking it will render the Service in Omni.

{{< imgproc 3.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}
This feature only works with HTTP services.
**Raw TCP or UDP are not supported**.

The services are only accessible to the users who are **authenticated to Omni
and have at least `Reader` level access** to the cluster containing the Service.
{{% /alert %}}
