content/docs/how-to-guides/how-to-register-an-azure-instance/index.md, before:

---
title: "How to Register an Azure Instance"
description: "A guide on how to register an Azure instance with Omni."
date: 2023-05-1T15:35:30-07:00
draft: false
weight: 30
---

This guide shows you how to register an Azure instance with Omni.

## Dashboard

Upon logging in you will be presented with the Omni dashboard.

{{< imgproc 1.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

## Download the Image

Download the Azure image from the Omni portal by clicking on the "Download Installation Media" button.
Click on the "Options" dropdown menu and search for the "Azure" option.
Notice there are two options: one for `amd64` and another for `arm64`.
Select the appropriate architecture for the machine you are registering, then click the "Download" button.

Once downloaded to your local machine, untar with `tar -xvf /path/to/image`

## Upload the Image

{{< tabpane text=true >}}
{{% tab header="UI" %}}

In the Azure console, navigate to `Storage accounts`, and create a new storage account.
Once the account is provisioned, navigate to the resource and click `Upload`. In the `Upload Blob` form, select `Create New` container, and name your container (e.g. `omni-may-2023`).
Now click `Browse for Files`, and select the `disk.vhd` file that you uncompressed above, then select `Upload`.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab header="CLI" %}}
We'll make use of the following environment variables throughout the setup.
Edit the variables below with your correct information.

```bash
# Storage account to use
export STORAGE_ACCOUNT="StorageAccountName"

# Storage container to upload to
export STORAGE_CONTAINER="StorageContainerName"

# Resource group name
export GROUP="ResourceGroupName"

# Location
export LOCATION="centralus"

# Get storage account connection string based on info above
export CONNECTION=$(az storage account show-connection-string \
                    -n $STORAGE_ACCOUNT \
                    -g $GROUP \
                    -o tsv)
```

You can upload the image you uncompressed to blob storage with:

```bash
az storage blob upload \
  --connection-string $CONNECTION \
  --container-name $STORAGE_CONTAINER \
  -f /path/to/extracted/disk.vhd \
  -n omni-azure.vhd
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabpane >}}

## Convert the Image

{{< tabpane text=true >}}
{{% tab header="UI" %}}

In the Azure console select `Images`, and then `Create`.
Select a Resource Group, Name your image (e.g. omni-may), and set the OS type to Linux.
Now `Browse` to the storage blob created above, navigating to the container with the uploaded `disk.vhd`.
Select "Standard HDD" for account type, then click `Review and Create`, then `Create`.

Now we need to modify the created Azure Resource Manager image template that was created.
Click `Go To Resource` to go to the newly created image, then `Export Template`. then `Add to Library`.
Name the image template and specify a version, then click `Edit Template`.
In the template, edit the `diskSizeGB: 1` property to have a value of 10 instead of 1.
Create and import the template, which will return you to the original template, which can now be deleted: click `Overview` then `Delete`.
From the Home panel, search for `Template Specs`, and select the name of the template you just created, then `Deploy` the template. This creates an image you can use to provision VMs.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab header="CLI" %}}

Now that the image is present in our blob storage, we'll register it.

```bash
az image create \
  --name omni \
  --source https://$STORAGE_ACCOUNT.blob.core.windows.net/$STORAGE_CONTAINER/omni-azure.vhd \
  --os-type linux \
  -g $GROUP
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabpane >}}

## Create an Azure Instance

{{< tabpane text=true >}}
{{% tab header="UI" %}}

In Azure console select `Images` and the name of the image created above.
Now select `+ Create VM`.
Name your instance and select a machine size.
Ensure your instance has at least 4GB of memory.
Now, click `Create` at the bottom to create your instance.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab header="CLI" %}}

```bash
az vm create \
    --name azure-worker \
    --image omni \
    -g $GROUP \
    --admin-username talos \
    --generate-ssh-keys \
    --verbose \
    --os-disk-size-gb 20 
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabpane >}}

## Conclusion

In the Omni UI, navigate to the "Machines" menu in the sidebar.
You should now see the Azure machine that was created listed as an available machine, registered with Omni and ready to provision.

Commit message:

docs: update to only use CLI for machine creation to set the OS disk size
Signed-off-by: Steve Francis <steve.francis@talos-systems.com>

content/docs/how-to-guides/how-to-register-an-azure-instance/index.md, after:

---
title: "How to Register an Azure Instance"
description: "A guide on how to register an Azure instance with Omni."
date: 2023-05-1T15:35:30-07:00
draft: false
weight: 30
---

This guide shows you how to register an Azure instance with Omni.

## Dashboard

Upon logging in you will be presented with the Omni dashboard.

{{< imgproc 1.png Resize "900x" >}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

## Download the Image

Download the Azure image from the Omni portal by clicking on the "Download Installation Media" button.
Click on the "Options" dropdown menu and search for the "Azure" option.
Notice there are two options: one for `amd64` and another for `arm64`.
Select the appropriate architecture for the machine you are registering, then click the "Download" button.

Once downloaded to your local machine, untar with `tar -xvf /path/to/image`

## Upload the Image

{{< tabpane text=true >}}
{{% tab header="UI" %}}

In the Azure console, navigate to `Storage accounts`, and create a new storage account.
Once the account is provisioned, navigate to the resource and click `Upload`. In the `Upload Blob` form, select `Create New` container, and name your container (e.g. `omni-may-2023`).
Now click `Browse for Files`, and select the `disk.vhd` file that you uncompressed above, then select `Upload`.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab header="CLI" %}}
We'll make use of the following environment variables throughout the setup.
Edit the variables below with your correct information.

```bash
# Storage account to use
export STORAGE_ACCOUNT="StorageAccountName"

# Storage container to upload to
export STORAGE_CONTAINER="StorageContainerName"

# Resource group name
export GROUP="ResourceGroupName"

# Location
export LOCATION="centralus"

# Get storage account connection string based on info above
export CONNECTION=$(az storage account show-connection-string \
                    -n $STORAGE_ACCOUNT \
                    -g $GROUP \
                    -o tsv)
```

You can upload the image you uncompressed to blob storage with:

```bash
az storage blob upload \
  --connection-string $CONNECTION \
  --container-name $STORAGE_CONTAINER \
  -f /path/to/extracted/disk.vhd \
  -n omni-azure.vhd
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabpane >}}

## Convert the Image

{{< tabpane text=true >}}
{{% tab header="UI" %}}

In the Azure console select `Images`, and then `Create`.
Select a Resource Group, Name your image (e.g. omni-may), and set the OS type to Linux.
Now `Browse` to the storage blob created above, navigating to the container with the uploaded `disk.vhd`.
Select "Standard HDD" for account type, then click `Review and Create`, then `Create`.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab header="CLI" %}}

Now that the image is present in our blob storage, we'll register it.

```bash
az image create \
  --name omni \
  --source https://$STORAGE_ACCOUNT.blob.core.windows.net/$STORAGE_CONTAINER/omni-azure.vhd \
  --os-type linux \
  -g $GROUP
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabpane >}}

## Create an Azure Instance

{{< tabpane text=true >}}

{{% tab header="CLI" %}}
Creating an instance requires setting the os-disk-size property, which is easiest to achieve via the CLI:
```bash
az vm create \
    --name azure-worker \
    --image omni \
    -g $GROUP \
    --admin-username talos \
    --generate-ssh-keys \
    --verbose \
    --os-disk-size-gb 20 
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabpane >}}

## Conclusion

In the Omni UI, navigate to the "Machines" menu in the sidebar.
You should now see the Azure machine that was created listed as an available machine, registered with Omni and ready to provision.
